Readme.md, before:

# EDK II Project

A modern, feature-rich, cross-platform firmware development environment
for the UEFI and PI specifications from www.uefi.org.

# Build Status

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Host Type</th>
    <th>Toolchain</th>
    <th>Branch</th>
    <th>Build Status</th>
    <th>Test Status</th>
    <th>Code Coverage</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Windows</td>
    <td>VS2019</td>
    <td>edk2-ci</td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=27&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_apis/build/status/edk2-staging/Windows%20VS2019%20CI?branchName=edk2-ci"/></a>
    </td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=27&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/azure-devops/tests/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/27.svg"/></a>
    </td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=27&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/coverage-coming_soon-blue"/></a>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Ubuntu</td>
    <td>GCC</td>
    <td>edk2-ci</td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=26&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_apis/build/status/edk2-staging/Ubuntu%20GCC5%20CI?branchName=edk2-ci"/></a>
    </td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=26&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/azure-devops/tests/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/26.svg"/></a>
    </td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=26&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/coverage-coming_soon-blue"/></a>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

[More CI Build information](.pytool/Readme.md)

# License Details

The majority of the content in the EDK II open source project uses a
[BSD-2-Clause Plus Patent License](License.txt).  The EDK II open source project
contains the following components that are covered by additional licenses:
* [BaseTools/Source/C/BrotliCompress](BaseTools/Source/C/BrotliCompress/LICENSE)
* [MdeModulePkg/Library/BrotliCustomDecompressLib](MdeModulePkg/Library/BrotliCustomDecompressLib/LICENSE)
* [BaseTools/Source/C/LzmaCompress](BaseTools/Source/C/LzmaCompress/LZMA-SDK-README.txt)
* [MdeModulePkg/Library/LzmaCustomDecompressLib](MdeModulePkg/Library/LzmaCustomDecompressLib/LZMA-SDK-README.txt)
* [IntelFrameworkModulePkg/Library/LzmaCustomDecompressLib/Sdk](IntelFrameworkModulePkg/Library/LzmaCustomDecompressLib/LZMA-SDK-README.txt)
* [BaseTools/Source/C/VfrCompile/Pccts](BaseTools/Source/C/VfrCompile/Pccts/RIGHTS)
* [MdeModulePkg/Universal/RegularExpressionDxe/Oniguruma](MdeModulePkg/Universal/RegularExpressionDxe/Oniguruma/README)
* [OvmfPkg](OvmfPkg/License.txt)
* [CryptoPkg/Library/OpensslLib/openssl](https://github.com/openssl/openssl/blob/50eaac9f3337667259de725451f201e784599687/LICENSE)
* [ArmPkg/Library/ArmSoftFloatLib/berkeley-softfloat-3](https://github.com/ucb-bar/berkeley-softfloat-3/blob/b64af41c3276f97f0e181920400ee056b9c88037/COPYING.txt)

The EDK II Project is composed of packages.  The maintainers for each package
are listed in [Maintainers.txt](Maintainers.txt).

# Resources
* [TianoCore](http://www.tianocore.org)
* [EDK II](https://github.com/tianocore/tianocore.github.io/wiki/EDK-II)
* [Getting Started with EDK II](https://github.com/tianocore/tianocore.github.io/wiki/Getting-Started-with-EDK-II)
* [Mailing Lists](https://github.com/tianocore/tianocore.github.io/wiki/Mailing-Lists)
* [TianoCore Bugzilla](https://bugzilla.tianocore.org)
* [How To Contribute](https://github.com/tianocore/tianocore.github.io/wiki/How-To-Contribute)
* [Release Planning](https://github.com/tianocore/tianocore.github.io/wiki/EDK-II-Release-Planning)

# Code Contributions
To make a contribution to a TianoCore project, follow these steps.
1. Create a change description in the format specified below to
   use in the source control commit log.
2. Your commit message must include your `Signed-off-by` signature
3. Submit your code to the TianoCore project using the process
   that the project documents on its web page.  If the process is
   not documented, then submit the code on development email list
   for the project.
4. It is preferred that contributions are submitted using the same
   copyright license as the base project. When that is not possible,
   then contributions using the following licenses can be accepted:
   * BSD (2-clause): http://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-2-Clause
   * BSD (3-clause): http://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-3-Clause
   * MIT: http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
   * Python-2.0: http://opensource.org/licenses/Python-2.0
   * Zlib: http://opensource.org/licenses/Zlib

   For documentation:
   * FreeBSD Documentation License
     https://www.freebsd.org/copyright/freebsd-doc-license.html

   Contributions of code put into the public domain can also be
   accepted.

   Contributions using other licenses might be accepted, but further
   review will be required.

# Developer Certificate of Origin

Your change description should use the standard format for a
commit message, and must include your `Signed-off-by` signature.

In order to keep track of who did what, all patches contributed must
include a statement that to the best of the contributor's knowledge
they have the right to contribute it under the specified license.

The test for this is as specified in the [Developer's Certificate of
Origin (DCO) 1.1](https://developercertificate.org/). The contributor
certifies compliance by adding a line saying

  Signed-off-by: Developer Name <developer@example.org>

where `Developer Name` is the contributor's real name, and the email
address is one the developer is reachable through at the time of
contributing.

```
Developer's Certificate of Origin 1.1

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I
    have the right to submit it under the open source license
    indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best
    of my knowledge, is covered under an appropriate open source
    license and I have the right under that license to submit that
    work with modifications, whether created in whole or in part
    by me, under the same open source license (unless I am
    permitted to submit under a different license), as indicated
    in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other
    person who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified
    it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution
    are public and that a record of the contribution (including all
    personal information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is
    maintained indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with
    this project or the open source license(s) involved.
```

# Sample Change Description / Commit Message

```
From: Contributor Name <contributor@example.com>
Subject: [Repository/Branch PATCH] Pkg-Module: Brief-single-line-summary

Full-commit-message

Signed-off-by: Contributor Name <contributor@example.com>
```

## Notes for sample patch email

* The first line of commit message is taken from the email's subject
  line following `[Repository/Branch PATCH]`. The remaining portion of the
  commit message is the email's content.
* `git format-patch` is one way to create this format

## Definitions for sample patch email

* `Repository` is the identifier of the repository the patch applies.
  This identifier should only be provided for repositories other than
  `edk2`. For example `edk2-BuildSpecification` or `staging`.
* `Branch` is the identifier of the branch the patch applies. This
  identifier should only be provided for branches other than `edk2/master`.
  For example `edk2/UDK2015`, `edk2-BuildSpecification/release/1.27`, or
  `staging/edk2-test`.
* `Module` is a short identifier for the affected code or documentation. For
  example `MdePkg`, `MdeModulePkg/UsbBusDxe`, `Introduction`, or
  `EDK II INF File Format`.
* `Brief-single-line-summary` is a short summary of the change.
* The entire first line should be less than ~70 characters.
* `Full-commit-message` a verbose multiple line comment describing
  the change.  Each line should be less than ~70 characters.
* `Signed-off-by` is the contributor's signature identifying them
  by their real/legal name and their email address.

# Submodules

Submodule in EDK II is allowed but submodule chain should be avoided
as possible as we can. Currently EDK II contains two submodules

- CryptoPkg/Library/OpensslLib/openssl
- ArmPkg/Library/ArmSoftFloatLib/berkeley-softfloat-3

The latter one is actually required by previous one. It's inevitable
in openssl-1.1.1 (since stable201905) for floating point parameter
conversion, but should be dropped once there's no such need in future
release of openssl.

To get a full, buildable EDK II repository, use following steps of git
command

```
$ git clone https://github.com/tianocore/edk2.git
$ cd edk2
$ git submodule update --init
$ cd ..
```

If there's update for submodules, use following git commands to get the
latest submodules code.

```
$ cd edk2
$ git pull
$ git submodule update
```

Note: When cloning submodule repos, '--recursive' option is not
recommended. EDK II itself will not use any code/feature from
submodules in above submodules. So using '--recursive' adds a
dependency on being able to reach servers we do not actually want
any code from, as well as needlessly downloading code we will not
use.

Commit message:

Readme.md: remove positional references from submodule description
Remove references to the number of submodules in the tree, as well as
reword the referring to specific submodules as "former" and "previous".
This means we won't need to keep updating the surrounding text if we
add/remove submodules.

Cc: Andrew Fish <afish@apple.com>
Cc: Michael D Kinney <michael.d.kinney@intel.com>
Signed-off-by: Leif Lindholm <leif.lindholm@linaro.org>
Reviewed-by: Laszlo Ersek <lersek@redhat.com>

Readme.md, after:

# EDK II Project

A modern, feature-rich, cross-platform firmware development environment
for the UEFI and PI specifications from www.uefi.org.

# Build Status

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Host Type</th>
    <th>Toolchain</th>
    <th>Branch</th>
    <th>Build Status</th>
    <th>Test Status</th>
    <th>Code Coverage</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Windows</td>
    <td>VS2019</td>
    <td>edk2-ci</td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=27&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_apis/build/status/edk2-staging/Windows%20VS2019%20CI?branchName=edk2-ci"/></a>
    </td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=27&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/azure-devops/tests/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/27.svg"/></a>
    </td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=27&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/coverage-coming_soon-blue"/></a>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Ubuntu</td>
    <td>GCC</td>
    <td>edk2-ci</td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=26&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_apis/build/status/edk2-staging/Ubuntu%20GCC5%20CI?branchName=edk2-ci"/></a>
    </td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=26&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/azure-devops/tests/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/26.svg"/></a>
    </td>
    <td>
      <a  href="https://dev.azure.com/tianocore/edk2-ci-play/_build/latest?definitionId=26&branchName=edk2-ci">
      <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/coverage-coming_soon-blue"/></a>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

[More CI Build information](.pytool/Readme.md)

# License Details

The majority of the content in the EDK II open source project uses a
[BSD-2-Clause Plus Patent License](License.txt).  The EDK II open source project
contains the following components that are covered by additional licenses:
* [BaseTools/Source/C/BrotliCompress](BaseTools/Source/C/BrotliCompress/LICENSE)
* [MdeModulePkg/Library/BrotliCustomDecompressLib](MdeModulePkg/Library/BrotliCustomDecompressLib/LICENSE)
* [BaseTools/Source/C/LzmaCompress](BaseTools/Source/C/LzmaCompress/LZMA-SDK-README.txt)
* [MdeModulePkg/Library/LzmaCustomDecompressLib](MdeModulePkg/Library/LzmaCustomDecompressLib/LZMA-SDK-README.txt)
* [IntelFrameworkModulePkg/Library/LzmaCustomDecompressLib/Sdk](IntelFrameworkModulePkg/Library/LzmaCustomDecompressLib/LZMA-SDK-README.txt)
* [BaseTools/Source/C/VfrCompile/Pccts](BaseTools/Source/C/VfrCompile/Pccts/RIGHTS)
* [MdeModulePkg/Universal/RegularExpressionDxe/Oniguruma](MdeModulePkg/Universal/RegularExpressionDxe/Oniguruma/README)
* [OvmfPkg](OvmfPkg/License.txt)
* [CryptoPkg/Library/OpensslLib/openssl](https://github.com/openssl/openssl/blob/50eaac9f3337667259de725451f201e784599687/LICENSE)
* [ArmPkg/Library/ArmSoftFloatLib/berkeley-softfloat-3](https://github.com/ucb-bar/berkeley-softfloat-3/blob/b64af41c3276f97f0e181920400ee056b9c88037/COPYING.txt)

The EDK II Project is composed of packages.  The maintainers for each package
are listed in [Maintainers.txt](Maintainers.txt).

# Resources
* [TianoCore](http://www.tianocore.org)
* [EDK II](https://github.com/tianocore/tianocore.github.io/wiki/EDK-II)
* [Getting Started with EDK II](https://github.com/tianocore/tianocore.github.io/wiki/Getting-Started-with-EDK-II)
* [Mailing Lists](https://github.com/tianocore/tianocore.github.io/wiki/Mailing-Lists)
* [TianoCore Bugzilla](https://bugzilla.tianocore.org)
* [How To Contribute](https://github.com/tianocore/tianocore.github.io/wiki/How-To-Contribute)
* [Release Planning](https://github.com/tianocore/tianocore.github.io/wiki/EDK-II-Release-Planning)

# Code Contributions
To make a contribution to a TianoCore project, follow these steps.
1. Create a change description in the format specified below to
   use in the source control commit log.
2. Your commit message must include your `Signed-off-by` signature
3. Submit your code to the TianoCore project using the process
   that the project documents on its web page.  If the process is
   not documented, then submit the code on development email list
   for the project.
4. It is preferred that contributions are submitted using the same
   copyright license as the base project. When that is not possible,
   then contributions using the following licenses can be accepted:
   * BSD (2-clause): http://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-2-Clause
   * BSD (3-clause): http://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-3-Clause
   * MIT: http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
   * Python-2.0: http://opensource.org/licenses/Python-2.0
   * Zlib: http://opensource.org/licenses/Zlib

   For documentation:
   * FreeBSD Documentation License
     https://www.freebsd.org/copyright/freebsd-doc-license.html

   Contributions of code put into the public domain can also be
   accepted.

   Contributions using other licenses might be accepted, but further
   review will be required.

# Developer Certificate of Origin

Your change description should use the standard format for a
commit message, and must include your `Signed-off-by` signature.

In order to keep track of who did what, all patches contributed must
include a statement that to the best of the contributor's knowledge
they have the right to contribute it under the specified license.

The test for this is as specified in the [Developer's Certificate of
Origin (DCO) 1.1](https://developercertificate.org/). The contributor
certifies compliance by adding a line saying

  Signed-off-by: Developer Name <developer@example.org>

where `Developer Name` is the contributor's real name, and the email
address is one the developer is reachable through at the time of
contributing.

```
Developer's Certificate of Origin 1.1

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

(a) The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I
    have the right to submit it under the open source license
    indicated in the file; or

(b) The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best
    of my knowledge, is covered under an appropriate open source
    license and I have the right under that license to submit that
    work with modifications, whether created in whole or in part
    by me, under the same open source license (unless I am
    permitted to submit under a different license), as indicated
    in the file; or

(c) The contribution was provided directly to me by some other
    person who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified
    it.

(d) I understand and agree that this project and the contribution
    are public and that a record of the contribution (including all
    personal information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is
    maintained indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with
    this project or the open source license(s) involved.
```

# Sample Change Description / Commit Message

```
From: Contributor Name <contributor@example.com>
Subject: [Repository/Branch PATCH] Pkg-Module: Brief-single-line-summary

Full-commit-message

Signed-off-by: Contributor Name <contributor@example.com>
```

## Notes for sample patch email

* The first line of commit message is taken from the email's subject
  line following `[Repository/Branch PATCH]`. The remaining portion of the
  commit message is the email's content.
* `git format-patch` is one way to create this format

## Definitions for sample patch email

* `Repository` is the identifier of the repository the patch applies.
  This identifier should only be provided for repositories other than
  `edk2`. For example `edk2-BuildSpecification` or `staging`.
* `Branch` is the identifier of the branch the patch applies. This
  identifier should only be provided for branches other than `edk2/master`.
  For example `edk2/UDK2015`, `edk2-BuildSpecification/release/1.27`, or
  `staging/edk2-test`.
* `Module` is a short identifier for the affected code or documentation. For
  example `MdePkg`, `MdeModulePkg/UsbBusDxe`, `Introduction`, or
  `EDK II INF File Format`.
* `Brief-single-line-summary` is a short summary of the change.
* The entire first line should be less than ~70 characters.
* `Full-commit-message` a verbose multiple line comment describing
  the change.  Each line should be less than ~70 characters.
* `Signed-off-by` is the contributor's signature identifying them
  by their real/legal name and their email address.

# Submodules

Submodule in EDK II is allowed but submodule chain should be avoided
as possible as we can. Currently EDK II contains the following submodules

- CryptoPkg/Library/OpensslLib/openssl
- ArmPkg/Library/ArmSoftFloatLib/berkeley-softfloat-3

ArmSoftFloatLib is actually required by OpensslLib. It's inevitable
in openssl-1.1.1 (since stable201905) for floating point parameter
conversion, but should be dropped once there's no such need in future
release of openssl.

To get a full, buildable EDK II repository, use following steps of git
command

```
$ git clone https://github.com/tianocore/edk2.git
$ cd edk2
$ git submodule update --init
$ cd ..
```

If there's update for submodules, use following git commands to get the
latest submodules code.

```
$ cd edk2
$ git pull
$ git submodule update
```

Note: When cloning submodule repos, '--recursive' option is not
recommended. EDK II itself will not use any code/feature from
submodules in above submodules. So using '--recursive' adds a
dependency on being able to reach servers we do not actually want
any code from, as well as needlessly downloading code we will not
use.
